[SYCL][Doc] Extended group load/store APIs proposal (#7593)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_load_store_extended.asciidoc

Reviewer: I think we should name this file "proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_load_store.asciidoc".  Once we implement this extension and move it to "experimental", we can move the old one to "deprecated/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_load_store.asciidoc".

Author: Thank you, renamed

= sycl_ext_oneapi_group_load_store_extended

:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

== Introduction

IMPORTANT: This specification is a draft.

== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (c) 2022 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 specification, Revision 5. All references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the SYCL specification refer to that revision.

This extension also depends on the following other SYCL extensions:

* link:https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/supported/sycl_ext_oneapi_local_memory.asciidoc[

>   sycl_ext_oneapi_local_memory].

Reviewer 2: Is this really a dependency?  I see you're using it in one of the examples, but I can't see any part of the API that requires this extension.  I think you can move this to a note in the Usage Examples section.

* link:https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort.asciidoc[

>   sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort].

Reviewer 2: If we're going to use the `GroupHelper` concept across multiple extensions, it might be nice to pull it out into a separate extension.  It's not immediately clear that this sort extension is a dependency only because of the `GroupHelper` concept.

Reviewer 2: This was resolved in https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/7202; we decided to refer to the definition in sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort in all the extensions that use it.

* link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_properties].

> == Current State

Reviewer 2: I think you should replace this section with one that defines replacements for the single value functions, consistent with your other interfaces, e.g.:

```c++
// Load API
template<typename GroupHelper, typename InputIterator, typename OutputIterator,
        std::size_t ElementsPerWorkItem, typename Properties = properties<>>
void load_over_group(GroupHelper gh, InputIteratorT in_ptr,
                      OutputIteratorT out_ptr, Properties = {});
```

Author: Replaced for single values, please, take a look, not sure if we should take Output& in load case or just return it from function

Reviewer 2: I'm usually a fan of using return values but in this case, I see multiple advantages to taking the output by reference:
- It's consistent with the `span` overload
- We can deduce the desired output type (which may be useful if this interface later supports type conversion)

Reviewer 2: Addressed in 349f2592cb7feb996f4590565efa9312ba899773.

This proposal extends existing one for group load/store: link:https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_load_store.asciidoc[sycl_ext_oneapi_group_load_store]. Existing APIs are focused on single value/sycl::vec shown below:

[source,c++]
----
// Load API
template <typename T, access::address_space Space, access::decorated IsDecorated>
T load(const multi_ptr<T, Space, IsDecorated>* src);

template <int N, typename T, access::address_space Space, access::decorated IsDecorated>
vec<T, N> load(const multi_ptr<T, Space, IsDecorated> src);

// Store API
template <typename T, access::address_space Space, access::decorated IsDecorated>
void store(multi_ptr<T, Space, IsDecorated> dst, const T& x);

template <typename T, access::address_space Space, access::decorated IsDecorated>
void store(multi_ptr<T, Space, IsDecorated> dst, const vec<T, N>& x);
----

== Extended Proposal

The extended APIs provides the following features:

> * load/store with temporary memory buffer, which can be passed via GroupHelper such as `group_with_scratchpad` link:https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort.asciidoc#group-helper[group_with_scratchpad description from sort over group proposal]

Reviewer 2: Should there be overloads that _don't_ require a temporary memory buffer?

Author: it can be just the case when instead of `GroupHelper` just a group object is passed, but there won't be performance benefits in this case, I assume

Reviewer 2: I assumed that the memory provided by the `GroupHelper` would only be used if the data needed to be transposed, and only if the group is a work-group.  It seems like if the data doesn't need to be transposed it can be returned directly to the work-item (without going through intermediate memory), and if the group is a sub-group the transpose could use shuffles.

Reviewer 2: Resolved; there are now overloads accepting just a `Group`.

* load/store flexible amount of elements per work item as sycl::span

* specify data placement type via properties (1) or group_memory_helper (*naming is TBD) class (5)

> * extra options such as setting boundry values or limiting numbers of work items can be also specified via group_memory_helper

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* extra options such as setting boundary values or limiting numbers of work items can be also specified via group_memory_helper
```

                      sycl::span<OutputT, ItemsPerWorkItem> out, Properties = {}); (1)

template<typename GroupHelper, typename InputIterator, typename OutputT,
        std::size_t ElementsPerWorkItem, typename GroupMemoryHelper>
void load_over_group(GroupHelper gh, InputIteratorT in_ptr,
                      sycl::span<OutputT, ItemsPerWorkItem> out,
                      GroupMemoryHelper<typename InputIterator::value_type, ItemsPerWorkItem> memory_helper = {}); (2)

// Store API
template<typename GroupHelper, typename OutputIterator, typename InputT,
        std::size_t ElementsPerWorkItem, typename Properties = properties<>>
void store_over_group(GroupHelper gh, OutputIterator out_ptr,
                      sycl::span<InputT, ItemsPerWorkItem> in, Properties = {}); (3)

template<typename GroupHelper, typename OutputIterator, typename InputT,
                  std::size_t ElementsPerWorkItem, typename GroupMemoryHelper>
void store_over_group(GroupHelper gh, OutputIterator out_ptr,
                      sycl::span<InputT, ItemsPerWorkItem> in,
                      GroupMemoryHelper<InputT, ItemsPerWorkItem> memory_helper = {}); (4)

// Properties:

> enum class group_algorithm_data_placement {

Reviewer 2: Bikeshedding: This is a very long name, so we should try and find something shorter.

Author: I also haven't yet figured out if ve need input and output data placement properties or just one-way one (as in Example 2)

  blocked,
  striped
};

// Group Memory Helper (aka Loader/Storer) TBD:
template<typename T, std::size_t ElementsPerWorkItem>
class group_memory_helper {
public:
  template<typename Properties>
  group_memory_helper(Properties properties = {});

  void set_valid_items_num(std::size_t valid_items);

  void set_out_of_boundry_value(T oob_default);

  static constexpr std::size_t memory_required(sycl::memory_scope scope, std::size_t block_size);
}; (5)

}
----

(1) _Preconditions_: `in_ptr` must be the same for all work-items

> in the group.

Reviewer 2: Because of this restriction, I think we should rename `load_over_group` to `joint_load` and `store_over_group` to `joint_store`.  This is more aligned with the naming convention of SYCL 2020 group algorithms (e.g. `joint_reduce` requires all work-items to provide the same input range to reduce), and I think it's a more accurate description (because conceptually, the work-items in the group are cooperating to perform a single load/store).

Reviewer 2: Resolved; these have been renamed.

Reviewer 2: @aelizaro - Sorry for reopening this comment, but when I was reading back through again, I realized that there might be some ambiguity here.  I think I got confused and steered you in the wrong direction.

The description of "single value" load says:
```c++
template<typename Group, typename InputIteratorT,
         typename OutputT, typename Properties = properties<>>
void joint_load(Group g, InputIteratorT in_ptr, OutputT& out, Properties = {})
```

> _Effects_: Loads single element from `in_ptr` to `out`.

Are all the work-items loading the same (single) value from `in_ptr` (i.e. broadcasting a result from memory)?  Or are all work-items collaborating to load a contiguous block, and returning one element from the block to each work-item?

If the latter, I think the description of _Effects_ needs to be extended to say that a different value is returned to each work-item.  I also think that I was wrong to suggest `joint_load`/`store`; if a different value is returned to each work-item, the naming should be `group_load`/`store`.

Author: the latter, I will rename it back

_Constraints_: Only available if `GroupHelper` was created with a
work-group or sub-group and some associated scratch space.

_Effects_: Loads `ItemsPerWorkItem` elements from `in_ptr` to `out`
using the `gh` group helper object. Properties can specify data placement.

(2) _Preconditions_: `in_ptr` must be the same for all work-items

> in the group.

Reviewer 2: Should there be a precondition that `out` must be a pointer to the private address space?

To my mind, this restriction is what makes this a "load" and not a "copy".  If `out` can be a pointer to global memory, the function would be able to "load" from global memory and implicitly store the result back to global memory, which would be weird.

_Constraints_: Only available if `GroupHelper` was created with a
work-group or sub-group and some associated scratch space.

_Effects_: Loads `ItemsPerWorkItem` elements from `in_ptr` to `out`

> using the `gh` group helper object. `GroupMemoryHelper` specifies data placement properties and also can work with extra options such as specifying out-of-boundry value and limited work-items number to work with.

Reviewer 2: Instead of using extra options in the `GroupMemoryHelper`, could we make these two new properties?  Then a developer could use them with the overload that doesn't require a `GroupMemoryHelper`.

Author: OK, removed (2) and (4) and added a TODO for other properties, wanna do some prototyping for it

(3) _Preconditions_: `out_ptr` must be the same for all work-items
in the group.

_Constraints_: Only available if `GroupHelper` was created with a
work-group or sub-group and some associated scratch space.

_Effects_: Stores `ItemsPerWorkItem` elements from `in` span to `out_ptr`
using the `gh` group helper object. Properties can specify data placement.

(4) _Preconditions_: `out_ptr` must be the same for all work-items
in the group.

_Constraints_: Only available if `GroupHelper` was created with a
work-group or sub-group and some associated scratch space.

_Effects_: Stores `ItemsPerWorkItem` elements from `in` to `out_ptr`

> using the `gh` group helper object. `GroupMemoryHelper` specifies data placement properties and also can work with extra options such as specifying out-of-boundry value and limited work-items number to work with.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using the `gh` group helper object. `GroupMemoryHelper` specifies data placement properties and also can work with extra options such as specifying out-of-boundary value and limited work-items number to work with.
```

= sycl_ext_oneapi_group_load_store

:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

== Introduction

IMPORTANT: This specification is a draft.

== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (c) 2022 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 specification, Revision 6.
All references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in
the SYCL specification refer to that revision.

This extension also depends on the following other SYCL extensions:

* link:https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort] (`group_with_scratchpad` class used as GroupHelper).

* link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_properties].

== Overview

> This extention defines free functions for load/store operations within work

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This extension defines free functions for load/store operations within work
```

group scope.

== Single Value Functions

[source,c++]
----
// Load API
template<typename Group, typename InputIteratorT,
         typename OutputT, typename Properties = properties<>>
void joint_load(Group gh, InputIteratorT in_ptr,
                      OutputT& out, Properties = {});

// Store API
template<typename Group, typename InputT,
         typename OutputIteratorT, typename Properties = properties<>>
void joint_store(Group gh, InputT in,
                      OutputIteratorT out_ptr, Properties = {});
----

> 

Reviewer 2: I think we need to add the preconditions etc from below to these functions too.  This should be straightforward, mostly a copy-paste.

Author: @Pennycook, thank you, added. Please, also check again for span-based API, I changed the wording for _Constraints_ section, as the GroupHelper template parameter can be just a group as well, as it is shown in Example 1.

Also, I fixed the single value store function with const InputT& instead of just InputT.

@dkhaldi, @Pennycook, I also added an overload for sycl::vec (new functions (3) and (4)), as in the span-based case it looks a bit ugly: https://github.com/intel/llvm-test-suite/blob/0fd0b218b4e0a4c2b486f3863b0244f54aa0717d/SYCL/GroupLoadStore/group_load_store_span_api.cpp#L167

unlike marray, which is nice with begin() and end(): https://github.com/intel/llvm-test-suite/blob/0fd0b218b4e0a4c2b486f3863b0244f54aa0717d/SYCL/GroupLoadStore/group_load_store_span_api.cpp#L136

please, advise if we should keep it

Reviewer 3: @aelizaro, thank you. These are good examples to show this feature works on vec and marray.
- Is there an another document that already talks about construction of span using vec and marray? 
- Does the example you added to llvm-test-suite currently run on CPU and GPU? I did not see XFAIL there.

Author: @dkhaldi, thank you

* For the construction of span using vec and marray I don't know if there are any specific docs, but they both are guaranteed to be in memory sequentially and contiguously: https://registry.khronos.org/SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html#memory-layout-and-alignment
* I assume examples shouldn't run now at all, since for this functionality there is no implementation available yet, only API proposal and initial prototypes

> == Funtions with fixed-size arrays

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Functions with fixed-size arrays
```

> This APIs provides the following features:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This API provides the following features:
```

* load/store with temporary memory buffer, which can be passed via GroupHelper
such as `group_with_scratchpad` link:https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort.asciidoc#group-helper[group_with_scratchpad description from sort over group proposal]

* load/store flexible amount of elements per work item as sycl::span

* specify data placement type via properties (1) or extra options such as
setting boundary values or limiting numbers of work items

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

// Load API
template<typename GroupHelper, typename InputIteratorT, typename OutputT,
        std::size_t ElementsPerWorkItem, typename Properties = properties<>>
void joint_load(GroupHelper gh, InputIteratorT in_ptr,

>                 sycl::span<OutputT, ItemsPerWorkItem> out, Properties = {}); (1)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                sycl::span<OutputT, ElementsPerWorkItem> out, Properties = {}); (1)
```

        std::size_t ElementsPerWorkItem, typename Properties = properties<>>
void joint_store(GroupHelper gh, OutputIteratorT out_ptr,
                  sycl::span<InputT, ItemsPerWorkItem> in, Properties = {}); (2)

// Properties:
enum class group_algorithm_data_placement {
  blocked,
  striped
};

// TO DO: add extra properties for setting boundary values

// Support memory function to define the needed amount of temporary memory
// needed (name TBD)

template<typename T, std::size_t ElementsPerWorkItem>
constexpr std::size_t memory_required(sycl::memory_scope scope,
                                      std::size_t block_size); (3)

}
----

(1) _Preconditions_: `in_ptr` must be the same for all work-items
in the group. `out` is a sycl::span made from a pointer of private memory space.

_Constraints_: Only available if `GroupHelper` was created with a
work-group or sub-group and some associated scratch space.

_Effects_: Loads `ItemsPerWorkItem` elements from `in_ptr` to `out`
using the `gh` group helper object. Properties can specify data placement.

(2) _Preconditions_: `out_ptr` must be the same for all work-items

> in the group. `in` is a sycl::span made from a pointer of private memory space.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the group. `in` must be a `sycl::span` made from a pointer to the private memory space.
```

_Constraints_: Only available if `GroupHelper` was created with a
work-group or sub-group and some associated scratch space.

> _Effects_: Stores `ItemsPerWorkItem` elements from `in` span to `out_ptr`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Effects_: Stores `ElementsPerWorkItem` elements from `in` span to `out_ptr`
```

using the `gh` group helper object. Properties can specify data placement.

== Usage Examples

> 1.Example shows the simpliest case without local memory usage of blocked load

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1.Example shows the simplest case without local memory usage of blocked load
```

Copyright (c) 2022 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 specification, Revision 6.
All references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in
the SYCL specification refer to that revision.

This extension also depends on the following other SYCL extensions:

* link:https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort] (`group_with_scratchpad` class used as GroupHelper).

* link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_properties].

== Overview

This extension defines free functions for load/store operations within work
group scope.

== Single Value Functions

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

// Load API scalar
template<typename Group, typename InputIteratorT,
         typename OutputT, typename Properties = properties<>>
void group_load(Group g, InputIteratorT in_ptr,

>                       OutputT& out, Properties = {}); (1)

Reviewer 4: Here and below. I'd suggest to write `// (1)` instead of just `(1)`. Since this is C++ code it will look like a comment. Now it looks like `(1)` is a part of the code

Author: done

// Store API scalar
template<typename Group, typename InputT,
         typename OutputIteratorT, typename Properties = properties<>>
void group_store(Group g, const InputT& in,
                      OutputIteratorT out_ptr, Properties = {}); (2)

}
----

(1) _Preconditions_: `in_ptr` must be the same for all work-items
in the group.

_Constraints_: Only available if `Group` is a work-group or sub-group.

> _Effects_: Loads single element from `in_ptr` to `out`.

Reviewer 4: Add "using the g group object" or something like that because we don't specify how to use `g` here.

Author: Good point! Actually, I noticed an inconsistency in my understanding here with [the previous proposal](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_load_store.asciidoc), @andreyfe1, @Pennycook, please, advice:

I thought that for single value API the following test-case should work ok: https://github.com/intel/llvm-test-suite/blob/8950ae921bd2be785d42de113a278f91571d830e/SYCL/GroupLoadStore/group_load_store_api.cpp#L19
and we don't need to pass different pointers for different groups and use addresses like: `ptr + g.get_group_id(0) * g.get_local_range(0)  + g.get_local_id(0)`.

But if it should work as `ptr + get_local_id()`, then if we want to load from global memory for each work item, it will look like this:

```
      cgh.parallel_for(sycl::nd_range<1>(size, block_size),
                       [=](sycl::nd_item<1> item) {
                         auto g = item.get_group();

                         InputT data;

                         sycl_exp::group_load(g, in.get_pointer() +  g.get_group_id(0) * g.get_local_range(0), data);

                         data += item.get_global_linear_id() * 100000;

                         sycl_exp::group_store(g, data, out.get_pointer() + g.get_group_id(0) * g.get_local_range(0));
                       });
    });
```
or is it just not the primary use case we want to cover? As we assume the same behaviour as mentioned above for sycl::vec and span-based API:

```
      cgh.parallel_for(
          sycl::nd_range<1>(block_count * block_size, block_size),
          [=](sycl::nd_item<1> item) {
            InputT data[items_per_thread];

            sycl_exp::group_load(item.get_group(), in.get_pointer(),
                                 sycl::span{data});

            for (int i = 0; i < items_per_thread; ++i) {
              data[i] += item.get_global_linear_id() * 100000 + i * 1000;
            }

            sycl_exp::group_store(item.get_group(), sycl::span{data},
                                  out.get_pointer());
          });
```
It will load a contiguous block of memory from the single global pointer by default:
|         wi[0]         |             wi[1]    |          wi[2]        |
|-----------------|------------------|-----------------|
| in[0] in[1] in[2] | in[3] in[4] in[5] | in[6] in[7] in[8] |

in striped case:
|         wi[0]         |             wi[1]    |          wi[2]        |
|-----------------|------------------|-----------------|
| in[0] in[3] in[6] | in[1] in[4] in[7] | in[2] in[5] in[8] |

Author: or it is still a matter of naming and we should distinguish group_load/store, which works with local_id() in the group and block_load/store which works with global_id()

Reviewer 2: I think it's important that the group algorithms assume that only the group passed into the function is involved in the call.  If the behavior was defined such that `sycl::group_load(g, ptr)` looked at the _global_ work-item ID, then the only way to access all the data in `ptr` would be to ensure that all the groups execute the `load` function.  I think most developers write code from the perspective of a single work-item, and so they're used to having to calculate things like per-group offsets.

The use-case that you mentioned is important, though, and the planned solution is to provide different types of group (e.g. see [sycl_ext_oneapi_root_group](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_root_group.asciidoc)):

```c++
sycl::root_group = it.get_root_group();
sycl::group_load(root_group, in.get_pointer(), sycl::span{data});
```

The `root_group` is a group containing all of the work-items in the kernel, and so calling `root_group::local_id` is equivalent to calling `group::global_id`.

Author: ooh, I see, that is a cool proposal. I will align with the initial one, add a detailed description for the expected behaviour and update the tests, thank you!

Author: both the proposal and test cases are updated to work with the local scope

> Properties TBD (setting boundary values or limiting numbers of work items).

Author: I think it still makes sense to keep it, as we won't be able to add it as an extra API with default parameter in the future without breaking compatibility as there will be ambiguity

> Properties TBD (setting boundary values or limiting numbers of work items).

Reviewer 5: Can we then add a more user-friendly phrase like: this argument is reserved for future revisions of this extension and it is ignored for now. Or do we want to say that passing any properties here results in a compilation error or UB?

> Properties TBD (setting boundary values or limiting numbers of work items).

Author: updates, please, check wording

the SYCL specification refer to that revision.

This extension also depends on the following other SYCL extensions:

* link:https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort] (`group_with_scratchpad` class used as GroupHelper).

* link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_properties].

== Overview

This extension defines free functions for load/store operations within work
group scope.

== Single Value Functions

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

// Load API scalar
template<typename Group, typename InputIteratorT,
         typename OutputT, typename Properties = properties<>>
void group_load(Group g, InputIteratorT in_ptr,
                      OutputT& out, Properties = {}); // (1)

// Store API scalar
template<typename Group, typename InputT,
         typename OutputIteratorT, typename Properties = properties<>>
void group_store(Group g, const InputT& in,
                      OutputIteratorT out_ptr, Properties = {}); // (2)

}
----

(1) _Preconditions_: `in_ptr` must be the same for all work-items
in the group.

> _Constraints_: Only available if `Group` is a work-group or sub-group.

Reviewer 5: I think we may want to add some additional constraints on `InputIteratorT` and `OutputT` here. 

For example, do we require `InputIteratorT` to be [random access iterator](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/named_req/RandomAccessIterator) or simple [forward iterator](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/named_req/ForwardIterator) should be enough?

Do we require type `T` which is obtained by dereferencing iterator of type `InputIteratorT` to be exactly the same as `OutputT`? Or is it enough if `T` is convertible to `OutputT`?

The same comment applies to all other functions and overloads proposed in this extension.

Author: Updated, please, check if the wording is ok

_Effects_: Loads single element from `in_ptr` to `out` by using the `g` group
object to identify memory location. For the 1d case it would be:

> `g.get_group_id(0) * g.get_local_range(0)  + g.get_local_id(0)`

Reviewer 5: Can we specify how exactly group `g` object identifies memory location which needs to be loaded? Based on the example, I _assume_ that every work item loads an element address of which is calculated as `in_ptr + g.get_local_linear_id()` - is it correct understanding?

It is just I don't think that it is enough for the spec to provide an example instead of actually documenting how it is supposed to work.

Author: yes, you are right, updated description everywhere

_Effects_: Stores single element `in` to `out_ptr` by using the `g` group
object to identify memory location. For the 1d case it would be:
`g.get_group_id(0) * g.get_local_range(0)  + g.get_local_id(0)`

Properties TBD (setting boundary values or limiting numbers of work items).

== `sycl::vec` Functions

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

// Load API sycl::vec overload
template<typename Group, typename InputIteratorT,
         typename OutputT, int N, typename Properties = properties<>>
void group_load(Group g, InputIteratorT in_ptr,
                      sycl::vec<OutputT, N>& out, Properties = {}); // (3)

// Store API sycl::vec overload
template<typename Group, typename InputT, int N,
         typename OutputIteratorT, typename Properties = properties<>>
void group_store(Group g, const sycl::vec<InputT, N>& in,
                      OutputIteratorT out_ptr, Properties = {}); // (4)

}
----

(3) _Preconditions_: `in_ptr` must be the same for all work-items
in the group.

_Constraints_: Only available if `Group` is a work-group or sub-group.

_Effects_: Loads `N` elements from `in_ptr` to `out`

> using the `g` group object. Properties can specify data placement.

Reviewer 5: What is the default placement if no properties provided? Do we need to add a comment describing potential future direction, i.e. how exactly we imagine properties affect data placement?

Author: Specified default one

setting boundary values or limiting numbers of work items (TODO in design
considerations)

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

// Load API
template<typename GroupHelper, typename InputIteratorT, typename OutputT,
        std::size_t ElementsPerWorkItem, typename Properties = properties<>>
void group_load(GroupHelper gh, InputIteratorT in_ptr,
                sycl::span<OutputT, ElementsPerWorkItem> out, Properties = {}); // (6)

// Store API
template<typename GroupHelper, typename OutputIteratorT, typename InputT,
        std::size_t ElementsPerWorkItem, typename Properties = properties<>>
void group_store(GroupHelper gh, sycl::span<InputT, ItemsPerWorkItem> in,
                 OutputIteratorT out_ptr,  Properties = {}); // (7)

// Properties:
enum class group_algorithm_data_placement {
  blocked,
  striped
};

// Support memory function to define the needed amount of temporary memory
// needed (name TBD)

template<typename T, std::size_t ElementsPerWorkItem>
constexpr std::size_t memory_required(sycl::memory_scope scope,
                                      std::size_t block_size); // (8)

}
----

> (6) _Preconditions_: `in_ptr` must be the same for all work-items

Reviewer 5: It seems like for this overload we actually do have properties we want to support: do we want to restrict the API to them? Like specifying which exact properties are supported by certain overloads? And what happens if wrong properties are passed?

== Introduction

IMPORTANT: This specification is a draft.

== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (c) 2022 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 specification, Revision 6.
All references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in
the SYCL specification refer to that revision.

This extension also depends on the following other SYCL extensions:

* link:https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort] (`group_with_scratchpad` class used as GroupHelper).

* link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_properties].

== Overview

This extension defines free functions for load/store operations within work
group scope.

== Single Value Functions

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

// Load API scalar
template<typename Group, typename InputIteratorT,

>          typename OutputT, typename Properties = properties<>>

Reviewer 6: Properties extension doesn't provide `properties<>`, IIUC
```suggestion
         typename OutputT, typename Properties = decltype(properties())>
```

void group_load(Group g, InputIteratorT in_ptr,
                      OutputT& out, Properties = {}); // (1)

// Store API scalar
template<typename Group, typename InputT,
         typename OutputIteratorT, typename Properties = properties<>>
void group_store(Group g, const InputT& in,
                      OutputIteratorT out_ptr, Properties = {}); // (2)

}
----

(1) _Preconditions_: `in_ptr` must be the same for all work-items
in the group.

._Constraints_:
* Only available if `Group` is a work-group or sub-group.
* `InputIteratorT` suppose to be a random access iterator.
* Value type of `InputIteratorT` must be convertible to OutputT.

_Effects_: Loads single element from `in_ptr` to `out` by using the `g` group
object to identify memory location as `in_ptr` + `g.get_local_linear_id()`.

`Properties` argument is reserved for future revisions of this extention and is
ignored now. Default value is empty `sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::properties<>`

> May be used in future for setting boundary values or limiting numbers of work items.

Reviewer 6: I'd suggest to introduce `alignment` property because otherwise we won't be able to optimize out a runtime alignment check.

._Constraints_:
* Only available if `GroupHelper` is a
work-group or sub-group or `GroupHelper` was created with a
work-group or sub-group and some associated scratch space
(link:https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort.asciidoc[`group_with_scratchpad`]).
* `OutputIteratorT` suppose to be a random access iterator.
* InputT must be convertible to value type of `OutputIteratorT`.

_Effects_: Stores `ElementsPerWorkItem` elements from `in` span to `out_ptr`
using the `gh` group helper object.

Properties may specify xref:data_placement[data placement].
Default placement is a blocked one:
`out_ptr[gh.get_local_linear_id() * ItemsPerWorkItem + i]` = `in[i];`
in striped case:
`out_ptr[gh.get_local_linear_id() + gh.get_local_linear_range() * i]` = `in[i];`
for `i` between `0` and `ItemsPerWorkItem`.

(8)_Effects_: Returns size of temporary memory (in bytes) that is required for
scratch space in `GroupHelper`. Result depends on type `T`, `ElementsPerWorkItem`
and the scope parameter: use sycl::memory_scope::work_group to get memory size
required for each work-group; use sycl::memory_scope::sub_group to get memory

> size required for each sub-group. If other scope values are passed, behavior is

Reviewer 6: > to get memory size required for each sub-group

Would user have to allocate `returned_value * number_of_sub_groups` bytes? If so, that would force usage of `[[intel::reqd_sub_group_size]]`` attribute, because otherwise that number won't be computable.

Author: Does group_with_scratchpad works only for sycl::group or sub_group also? If the former, then I need to double-check, maybe it is not even a use-case for sub_group to use this extra memory

Reviewer 6: @Pennycook , do you know off the top of your head?

Reviewer 2: I believe `group_with_scratchpad` supports any type of group.  My understanding is that it's just a way to represent a group object and a pointer simultaneously -- there shouldn't be any requirement that the pointer is in any particular memory, so a group algorithm with sub-group scope could use local or global memory.

I agree it would be easier to reason about how many sub-groups exist for kernels with `reqd_sub_group_size`.

> unspecified.

Reviewer 6: ```
constexpr std::size_t memory_required(sycl::memory_scope scope,
                                      std::size_t block_size); // (8)
```

`block_size` parameter isn't described here.

Author: Added description

== Data placement

anchor:data_placement[]

To specify a correct data placement for placing of resulting data
there is a enum (proposed in link:https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort.asciidoc[`group_sort extention`]):

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

// Properties:
enum class group_algorithm_data_placement {
  blocked,
  striped
};

}
----

Data placement layout example on group_load:

* ElementsPerWorkItem = 4
* 3 work-items in the group
* input is: in_ptr[] = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11}

Consider 2 layouts:

1.`sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::group_algorithm_data_placement::blocked`.

|===
|Work-item id|Output stored in private fixed-size array

|0
|{0, 1, 2, 3}
|1
|{4, 5, 6, 7}
|2
|{8, 9, 10, 11}
|===

2.`sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::group_algorithm_data_placement::striped`.

|===
|Work-item id|Output stored in private fixed-size array

|0
|{0, 3, 6, 9}
|1
|{1, 4, 7, 10}
|2
|{2, 5, 8, 11}
|===

> There is a property that satisfies

Reviewer 6: I'm not a native speaker, so might be wrong here. That said, my first impression was that one of other extensions has already defined that property, but it seems not to be so (because group sort has separate input/output properties for that, albeit using the same wording as here). 

Can we change it to something along the lines of "this extension adds new property(ies)..."?

Author: Good point, changed description and added references to group sort's input/output_data_placement

== Usage Examples

1.Example shows the simplest case without local memory usage of blocked load
of global memory from `input` to the private array `data` and store it back to
`output`

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl_exp = sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental;

q.submit([&](sycl::handler& cgh) {
    cgh.parallel_for(
        sycl::nd_range<1>(global_size, local_size),
        [=](sycl::nd_item<1> item) {
            T data[items_per_thread];

            sycl_exp::group_load(item.get_group(), input, sycl::span{ data });

            // Work with data...

            sycl_exp::group_store(item.get_group(), output, sycl::span{ data });
        });
});
----

2.Example shows the simple case of blocked load of global memory from `input` to
the private array `data` and store it back to `output`
The temporary memory is allocated via `sycl::local_accessor`

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl_exp = sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental;

q.submit([&](sycl::handler& cgh) {
    constexpr auto temp_memory_size = sycl_exp::memory_required<T, items_per_thread>(
        sycl::memory_scope::work_group, block_size);
    sycl::local_accessor<std::byte> buf(temp_memory_size, cgh);
    cgh.parallel_for(

>         sycl::nd_range<1>(global_size, local_size),

Reviewer 6: Should there be some relation between `block_size` and `local_size`?

Author: fixed it in this example, should be same for work-group case, for sub-group case I assume it should be something like local_size = block_size * number of subgroups, but I am not sure performance-wise

* Value type of `InputIteratorT` must be convertible to OutputT.

_Effects_: Loads single element from `in_ptr` to `out` by using the `g` group
object to identify memory location as `in_ptr` + `g.get_local_linear_id()`.

`Properties` argument is reserved for future revisions of this extention and is
ignored now. Default value is empty `sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::properties<>`
May be used in future for setting boundary values or limiting numbers of work items.

(2) _Preconditions_: `out_ptr` must be the same for all work-items
in the group.

._Constraints_:
* Only available if `Group` is a work-group or sub-group.
* `OutputIteratorT` suppose to be a random access iterator.
* InputT must be convertible to value type of `OutputIteratorT`.

_Effects_: Stores single element `in` to `out_ptr` by using the `g` group
object to identify memory location as `out_ptr` + `g.get_local_linear_id()`

`Properties` argument is reserved for future revisions of this extention and is
ignored now. Default value is empty `sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::properties<>`
May be used in future for setting boundary values or limiting numbers of work items.

> == `sycl::vec` Functions

Author: `sycl::marray` has iterators, so it can use sycl::span API, as:

`
sycl::marray<T, items_per_thread> marray;
sycl::span<T, items_per_thread>{ marray.begin(), marray.end() };`

Do you think it needs an extra overload? (for sycl::vec it is a bit more ugly, that is why we added an extra overload)

= sycl_ext_oneapi_group_load_store

:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

== Introduction

IMPORTANT: This specification is a draft.

== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (c) 2024 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 specification, Revision 8.
All references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in
the SYCL specification refer to that revision.

This extension also depends on the following other SYCL extensions:

* link:../proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort.asciidoc[

>   sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort] (`group_with_scratchpad` class used as GroupHelper).

Reviewer: I think this dependency only exists for the "Fixed-size array Overload" parts of the API.  Those parts of the extension also seem to have some unresolved issues in the specification.  Do we think these parts are important enough to do right away, or could they be moved to a "Future direction" section in the document?

It would be nice to implement the other parts of this spec soon, so that we can deprecate / remove the `sub_group::load` and `sub_group::store` functions from the DPC++ implementation.  I was wondering if we could implement these other parts sooner if we delay the "Fixed-size array Overload" parts until later.

Reviewer 2: I think this is a good suggestion.

The single-value load/store functions are the most important for existing SYCL codes, and even just supporting these new functions would expose important new functionality for our GPUs (because the `sub_group::` versions don't allow selection of blocked/striped layout).

The fixed-size array overload parts are mainly useful to support patterns found in CUDA kernels that employ CUB.  They're important too, but could be implemented in a Phase 2.

Author: Agree, I moved everything related to group_with_scratchpad into Future direction section. @gmlueck, @Pennycook please take a look if it looks in place now

* link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[
  sycl_ext_oneapi_properties].

== Overview

This extension defines free functions for load/store operations within the
group scope.

== Load API

=== Single Value Overload

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

// Load scalar
template<typename Group, typename InputIteratorT,

>          typename OutputT, typename Properties = decltype(properties())>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         typename OutputT, typename Properties = empty_properties_t>
```

And other places too.

void group_load(Group g, InputIteratorT in_iter,
                      OutputT& out, Properties = {}); // (1)

}
----

> (1) _Preconditions_: `in_iter` must be the same for all work-items

Reviewer: These numeric callouts (e.g. `(1)`) seem to add more confusion.  For example, why does _Preconditions_ have the (1) while _Constraints_ does not?  I'd suggest removing them.

I usually only add the callouts if there are multiple functions in the same code block and the _Constraints_, etc. are different for each function.  In your case, the code block only has one function, so the numeric callout doesn't seem necessary.

         typename OutputT, int N, typename Properties = empty_properties_t>
void group_load(Group g, InputIteratorT in_iter,
                      sycl::vec<OutputT, N>& out, Properties = {});
}
----

_Preconditions_: `in_iter` must be the same for all work-items
in the group.

._Constraints_:
* Only available if `Group` is a work-group or sub-group.
* `InputIteratorT` suppose to be a random access iterator.
* value type of `InputIteratorT` and `OutputT` types must be convertible basic
scalar types supported in device code.

_Effects_: Loads `N` elements from `in_iter` to `out`
using the `g` group object.
Properties may specify xref:data_placement[data placement].
Default data placement is a blocked one:
`out[i]` = `in_iter[g.get_local_linear_id() * N + i];`
in striped case:
`out[i]` = `in_iter[g.get_local_linear_id() + g.get_local_linear_range() * i];`
for `i` between `0` and `N`.

==== Fixed-size Array Overload

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

// Load API
template<typename GroupHelper, typename InputIteratorT, typename OutputT,
        std::size_t ElementsPerWorkItem, typename Properties = empty_properties_t>

> void group_load(GroupHelper gh, InputIteratorT in_iter,

Reviewer 2: Should this be a `Group` instead?

void group_store(Group g, const sycl::vec<InputT, N>& in,
                      OutputIteratorT out_iter, Properties = {});
}
----

_Preconditions_: `out_iter` must be the same for all work-items
in the group.

._Constraints_:
* Only available if `Group` is a work-group or sub-group.
* `OutputIteratorT` suppose to be a random access iterator.
* value type of `OutputIteratorT` and `InputT` types must be convertible basic
scalar types supported in device code.

_Effects_: Stores `N` elements from `in` vec to `out_iter`
using the `g` group object.
Properties may specify xref:data_placement[data placement].
Default placement is a blocked one:
`out_iter[g.get_local_linear_id() * N + i]` = `in[i];`
in striped case:
`out_iter[g.get_local_linear_id() + g.get_local_linear_range() * i]` = `in[i];`
for `i` between `0` and `N`.

==== Fixed-size Array Overload

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

// Store API
template<typename GroupHelper, typename OutputIteratorT, typename InputT,
        std::size_t ElementsPerWorkItem, typename Properties = empty_properties_t>
void group_store(GroupHelper gh, sycl::span<InputT, ItemsPerWorkItem> in,

>                  OutputIteratorT out_iter,  Properties = {});

Reviewer 2: Same comment as above -- should this be a `Group` now?

         typename OutputT, int N, typename Properties = empty_properties_t>
void group_load(Group g, InputIteratorT in_iter,
                      sycl::vec<OutputT, N>& out, Properties = {});
}
----

_Preconditions_: `in_iter` must be the same for all work-items
in the group.

._Constraints_:
* Only available if `Group` is a work-group or sub-group.
* `InputIteratorT` suppose to be a random access iterator.
* value type of `InputIteratorT` and `OutputT` types must be convertible basic
scalar types supported in device code.

_Effects_: Loads `N` elements from `in_iter` to `out`
using the `g` group object.
Properties may specify xref:data_placement[data placement].
Default data placement is a blocked one:
`out[i]` = `in_iter[g.get_local_linear_id() * N + i];`
in striped case:
`out[i]` = `in_iter[g.get_local_linear_id() + g.get_local_linear_range() * i];`
for `i` between `0` and `N`.

==== Fixed-size Array Overload

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

// Load API
template<typename Group, typename InputIteratorT, typename OutputT,
        std::size_t ElementsPerWorkItem, typename Properties = empty_properties_t>

> void group_load(Group gh, InputIteratorT in_iter,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
void group_load(Group g, InputIteratorT in_iter,
```

                sycl::span<OutputT, ElementsPerWorkItem> out, Properties = {});
}
----

._Preconditions_:
* `in_iter` must be the same for all work-items in the group.

> * `out` must be a `sycl::span` made from a pointer to the private memory space.

Reviewer 2: This is a good catch. I think we should probably clarify that the other interfaces are required to be allocated in the private address space too.

The original thinking here was that these functions are intended to be used to load from/store to memory.  If the arguments could be in the local or global memory space, the functionality would be closer to a "copy" operation.

> * `out` must be a `sycl::span` made from a pointer to the private memory space.

Reviewer: Is there really any reason to limit it to the private address space, though?  If the implementation works for any address space, why add a limitation?

With the existing API, we could do something like this:

```
acc[i] = sg.load(ptr);
```

The most natural way to write this in the new API would be:

```
group_load(sg, ptr, acc[i]);
```

However, that would violate the precondition because `acc[i]` is not in the private address space.  Instead, a conformant application would need to write:

```
T x;
group_load(sg, ptr, x);
acc[i] = x;
```

Wouldn't it be easier to just allow the destination of the load to be in any address space?

> * `out` must be a `sycl::span` made from a pointer to the private memory space.

Author: I don't have a strong opinion here from API point of view, but I assume for performance value it makes sense to guarantee that it is private memory, as I am not sure, that we can check it inside of the implementation.
@aelovikov-intel, could you please, advise here?

> * `out` must be a `sycl::span` made from a pointer to the private memory space.

Reviewer: The implementation could be written to ensure that the SPIR-V instruction does always access private memory.  For example (pseudo-code):

```
void group_load(Group g, InputIteratorT in_iter, OutputT& out) {
  OutputT tmp = __spirv_SubgroupBlockReadINTEL(in_iter);
  out = tmp;
}
```

I assume the optimizer will eliminate the use of `tmp`.

> * `out` must be a `sycl::span` made from a pointer to the private memory space.

Reviewer 2: > ```
> acc[i] = sg.load(ptr);
> ```

This is doing two things:

1. `sg.load(ptr)` loads from `ptr` into a variable (in private memory) and returns it.
2. `=` assigns the value from private memory to `acc[i]`

> ```
> T x;
> group_load(sg, ptr, x);
> acc[i] = x;
> ```

This is definitely more verbose, but I like that it clearly remains as two steps.  Somebody might otherwise expect `group_load(sg, ptr, &acc[i])` to issue something like a DMA to "load" directly into the memory associated with `acc[i]`.

> Wouldn't it be easier to just allow the destination of the load to be in any address space?

If we did this, I think we'd want to say in the specification that if the pointer is in the local or global address space, the implementation will/can load into private memory first.

But I'm still not sure this is a good idea.  Consider what this looks like for the store version of things:

```c++
group_store(g, &acc[i], ptr);
```

...would people expect that to load the value from `acc[i]` into private memory, then write it out to `ptr`?  Compare with:

```c++
T x = acc[i];
group_store(g, &x, ptr);
```

> * `out` must be a `sycl::span` made from a pointer to the private memory space.

Reviewer 6: > The implementation could be written to ensure that the SPIR-V instruction does always access private memory. For example (pseudo-code)

It has to be written like that to satisfy the implicit conversion to the output type that the extension mandates (or at least used to in previous revisions).

> * `out` must be a `sycl::span` made from a pointer to the private memory space.

Reviewer: > to satisfy the implicit conversion to the output type that the extension mandates (or at least used to in previous revisions)

The language about conversion is still in the spec.

> * `out` must be a `sycl::span` made from a pointer to the private memory space.

Reviewer: The reason I worry about adding the precondition about the private address space is that I think it's easy to miss.  The compiler won't diagnose an error, and I think our implementation will run correctly even if you pass a reference to a different address space.  I think this will lead to a lot of code that is non-conforming.  If our implementation ever changes to actually require the private address space, this code will suddenly break.

If we really want to require the private address space, I think we should change the parameter to be a `multi_ptr` with `address_space::private_space`.  That will force people to think about the address space, and the compiler will enforce it.  However, this also means that the common code pattern where you load into a block-scope variable will become much more verbose.

Given @aelovikov-intel's comment, it seems like we need the internal temporary variable anyway, so it seems like the implementation will end up allowing the parameter to be a reference to any address space anyways.

> * `out` must be a `sycl::span` made from a pointer to the private memory space.

Reviewer 2: I think the behavior you described is exactly why this ended up as a precondition.  It's UB, so anything can happen (including that it works).  We can't prove that it's a private pointer in the general case (e.g., for generic pointers).  But I agree that this is going to result in lots of bugs that are hard to track down.

I really don't want developers to have to use a `multi_ptr` to get good performance here, so you've convinced me that removing the restriction is a better solution.

How do you feel about my suggestion that we document that implementations can/will stage things via private memory?  I think we're going eventually going to end up with a `group_copy` function too, and I want to make sure that developers understand the difference.

> * `out` must be a `sycl::span` made from a pointer to the private memory space.

Author: ok, I removed private mentioning from preconditions, thank you!

> * `out` must be a `sycl::span` made from a pointer to the private memory space.

Reviewer: > How do you feel about my suggestion that we document that implementations can/will stage things via private memory?

This seems like an implementation detail to me.

> I think we're eventually going to end up with a `group_copy` function too, and I want to make sure that developers understand the difference.

How would `group_copy` functions be different?  In particular, the "Fixed-size Array Overload" from this spec seems like it is copying memory from an iterator to another container.

> * `out` must be a `sycl::span` made from a pointer to the private memory space.

Reviewer 2: > How would `group_copy` functions be different? In particular, the "Fixed-size Array Overload" from this spec seems like it is copying memory from an iterator to another container.

I think the difference is mainly intent: the developer can be clearer about what they're trying to express, and the implementation can have different behavior that's aligned with the developer's intent.

`group_load` was intended to mean "load this value from memory, in the most efficient way possible".  Developers should expect it to act as a (potentially faster) drop-in replacement for something like running `T x = *ptr;`, on each work-item.  The reason the function exists is to help implementations reason about cases where all the work-items in the group are accessing `ptr` in a pattern that can be optimized.  Conceptually, the developer describes how all the accesses made by individual work-items can be combined into a larger block.  Each work-item owns a dedicated piece of the output, but collaborating with other work-items improves performance.

`group_copy` will mean "copy these values from memory X to memory Y, in the most efficient way possible".  Developers should expect it to act as a (potentially faster) drop-in replacement for something like `memcpy` on a single work-item.  Conceptually, the developer describes an operation that needs to happen (i.e., the copy), and the implementation gets to decide how that operation is distributed across work-items or whether it can employ dedicated hardware (e.g. DMAs).  Work-items don't own dedicated pieces of the output, but collaborate to move all the bytes from X to Y.

> * `out` must be a `sycl::span` made from a pointer to the private memory space.

Reviewer: Yes, I see the difference now.  With the load / store functions, each work-item provides its contribution to the values that are loaded or stored via a non-uniform parameter.  With the copy function, there would just be two uniform iterators, and it would be undefined which work-items copied which elements.

._Constraints_:
* Only available if `Group` is a
work-group or sub-group.
* `InputIteratorT` suppose to be a random access iterator.
* Value type of `InputIteratorT` must be convertible to `OutputT`.

> _Effects_: Loads `ElementsPerWorkItem` elements from `in_iter` to `out`
> using the `gh` group helper object.
> Properties may specify xref:data_placement[data placement].
> Default placement is a blocked one:
> `out[i]` = `in_iter[gh.get_local_linear_id() * ElementsPerWorkItem + i];`
> in striped case:
> `out[i]` = `in_iter[gh.get_local_linear_id() + gh.get_local_linear_range() * i];`
> for `i` between `0` and `ElementsPerWorkItem`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Effects_: Loads `ElementsPerWorkItem` elements from `in_iter` to `out`
using the `g` group object.
Properties may specify xref:data_placement[data placement].
Default placement is a blocked one:
`out[i]` = `in_iter[g.get_local_linear_id() * ElementsPerWorkItem + i];`
in striped case:
`out[i]` = `in_iter[g.get_local_linear_id() + g.get_local_linear_range() * i];`
for `i` between `0` and `ElementsPerWorkItem`.
```

         typename OutputIteratorT, typename Properties = empty_properties_t>
void group_store(Group g, const sycl::vec<InputT, N>& in,
                      OutputIteratorT out_iter, Properties = {});
}
----

_Preconditions_: `out_iter` must be the same for all work-items
in the group.

._Constraints_:
* Only available if `Group` is a work-group or sub-group.
* `OutputIteratorT` suppose to be a random access iterator.
* value type of `OutputIteratorT` and `InputT` types must be convertible basic
scalar types supported in device code.

_Effects_: Stores `N` elements from `in` vec to `out_iter`
using the `g` group object.
Properties may specify xref:data_placement[data placement].
Default placement is a blocked one:
`out_iter[g.get_local_linear_id() * N + i]` = `in[i];`
in striped case:
`out_iter[g.get_local_linear_id() + g.get_local_linear_range() * i]` = `in[i];`
for `i` between `0` and `N`.

==== Fixed-size Array Overload

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

// Store API
template<typename Group, typename OutputIteratorT, typename InputT,
        std::size_t ElementsPerWorkItem, typename Properties = empty_properties_t>

> void group_store(Group gh, sycl::span<InputT, ItemsPerWorkItem> in,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
void group_store(Group g, sycl::span<InputT, ItemsPerWorkItem> in,
```

                 OutputIteratorT out_iter,  Properties = {});

}
----

._Preconditions_:
* `out_iter` must be the same for all work-items in the group.

> * `in` must be a `sycl::span` made from a pointer to the private memory space.

Author: removed, thanks

._Constraints_:
* Only available if `Group` is a
work-group or sub-group.
* `OutputIteratorT` suppose to be a random access iterator.
* `InputT` must be convertible to value type of `OutputIteratorT`.

> _Effects_: Stores `ElementsPerWorkItem` elements from `in` span to `out_iter`
> using the `gh` group helper object.
> 
> Properties may specify xref:data_placement[data placement].
> Default placement is a blocked one:
> `out_iter[gh.get_local_linear_id() * ItemsPerWorkItem + i]` = `in[i];`
> in striped case:
> `out_iter[gh.get_local_linear_id() + gh.get_local_linear_range() * i]` = `in[i];`
> for `i` between `0` and `ItemsPerWorkItem`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Effects_: Stores `ElementsPerWorkItem` elements from `in` span to `out_iter`
using the `g` group object.

Properties may specify xref:data_placement[data placement].
Default placement is a blocked one:
`out_iter[g.get_local_linear_id() * ItemsPerWorkItem + i]` = `in[i];`
in striped case:
`out_iter[g.get_local_linear_id() + gh.get_local_linear_range() * i]` = `in[i];`
for `i` between `0` and `ItemsPerWorkItem`.
```

=== Data Placement

anchor:data_placement[]

To specify a correct data placement for placing of resulting data
there is a enum

> (proposed in link:https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort.asciidoc[`group_sort extention`]):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(proposed also in link:https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort.asciidoc[`group_sort extention`]):
```

// Properties:
enum class group_algorithm_data_placement {
  blocked,
  striped
};

}
----

Data placement layout example on group_load:

* ElementsPerWorkItem = 4
* 3 work-items in the group
* input is: in_iter[] = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11}

Consider 2 layouts:

1.`sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::group_algorithm_data_placement::blocked`.

|===
|Work-item id|Output stored in private fixed-size array

|0
|{0, 1, 2, 3}
|1
|{4, 5, 6, 7}
|2
|{8, 9, 10, 11}
|===

2.`sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::group_algorithm_data_placement::striped`.

|===
|Work-item id|Output stored in private fixed-size array

|0
|{0, 3, 6, 9}
|1
|{1, 4, 7, 10}
|2
|{2, 5, 8, 11}
|===

This extention adds a property that satisfies
link:../experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_properties.asciidoc[SYCL Properties Extension]
requirements to identify data_placement similar to
link:https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_group_sort.asciidoc[`group_sort extention`]
`input_data_placement` and `output_data_placement`:
[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental::property
{
    template<group_algorithm_data_placement type>
    struct data_placement;
}

> ----

Reviewer: This is not the right way to define a compile-time property.  It should be like this instead:

```
namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental {

struct data_placement_key {
  template <group_algorithm_data_placement Type>
  using value_t =
      property_value<data_placement_key,
                     std::integral_constant<group_algorithm_data_placement, Type>>;
};

template <group_algorithm_data_placement Type>
inline constexpr data_placement_key::value_t<Type> data_placement;

inline constexpr data_placement_key::value_t<group_algorithm_data_placement::blocked> data_placement_blocked;
inline constexpr data_placement_key::value_t<group_algorithm_data_placement::striped> data_placement_striped;

} // namespace sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental
```

An example usage would then be like:

```
group_load(g, input, output_span, data_placement_blocked);
```

BTW, I agree with the previous comment that the name `group_algorithm_data_placement` is too long.  How about `data_placement_enum`.  We have a convention with other properties where we use the `_enum` suffix.

Author: Applied suggestion, I assume it is also need to be in experimental::property namespace?
And another thought: should data_placement also be a namespace then or is it too much?

The previous version was based on group_sort proposal, I assume it would also require similar update

Author: ok, got it, removed property:: namespace, thank you!

Specifies data layout used in group_load/store for `sycl::vec` or fixed-size
arrays functions.

Example:
`group_load(g, input, output_span, properties<data_placement<blocked>>{});`

> === Usage Example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Usage Example
```

The examples should be a peer section of "Specification", not a subsection within it.

Example shows the simplest case without local memory usage of blocked load
of global memory from `input` to the private array `data` and store it back to
`output`

[source,c++]
----
namespace sycl_exp = sycl::ext::oneapi::experimental;

constexpr std::size_t block_size = 32;
constexpr std::size_t items_per_thread = 4;
constexpr std::size_t block_count = 2;
constexpr std::size_t size = block_count * block_size * items_per_thread;

sycl::queue q;
sycl::usm_allocator<T, sycl::usm::alloc::device, 64> allocator(q);
std::vector<T, decltype(allocator)> input(size, allocator);

> std::vector<T, decltype(allocator)> output(size, allocator);

Reviewer: We don't support `usm_allocator` with `usm::alloc::device` memory.  This example also captures `std::vector` as a kernel argument which is not officially supported as an argument type.  I think it would be simpler to just use `malloc_device` here.

Author: Fixed, thank you

q.submit([&](sycl::handler& cgh) {
    cgh.parallel_for(
        sycl::nd_range<1>(size, block_size),
        [=](sycl::nd_item<1> item) {
            T data[items_per_thread];

            sycl_exp::group_load(item.get_group(), input.data(), sycl::span{ data });

            // Work with data...

>             sycl_exp::group_store(item.get_group(), output.data(), sycl::span{ data });

Reviewer: Aren't all work-items storing to the same 4 elements of `output`?

Author: Good catch! I think it was here since this logic supposed to be internal, but in current version, I added offset

        });
});
----

> === Future Directions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Future Directions
```

Sections below should also be reduced by one level.
